README.md, before:

# METARMap

A Raspberry Pi project to visualize flight conditions on a map using WS2811 LEDs. The LEDs change colors based on METAR weather data from aviationweather.gov.

## Features

- Real-time weather visualization with color-coded LEDs
- Support for wind and lightning animations
- Optional daytime dimming based on sunrise/sunset
- Optional external mini OLED display for METAR details
- Automated scheduling via crontab

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi (any model with GPIO)
- WS2811 LED strip (or compatible)
- Optional: Mini OLED display (SSD1306) for METAR details
- Internet connection for fetching weather data
- Basic knowledge of connecting LEDs to Raspberry Pi GPIO

## Hardware Setup

1. Connect the WS2811 LED strip to your Raspberry Pi:
   - Data pin to GPIO 18 (physical pin 12)
   - Power and ground as appropriate
   - For more details, see the [Adafruit NeoPixel guide](https://learn.adafruit.com/neopixels-on-raspberry-pi)

2. If using the optional display:
   - Connect the SSD1306 OLED display via I2C
   - Enable I2C in raspi-config

## Installation

1. Download or clone this repository to your Raspberry Pi:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/your-repo/METARMap.git
   cd METARMap
   ```

2. Run the setup script:
   ```
   sudo bash setup.sh
   ```
   This will install dependencies, set permissions, and configure crontab.

3. Reboot if I2C was enabled for the display.

## Configuration

To edit configuration files on your Raspberry Pi, use a text editor like `nano`. For example, to edit the airports file:

```
nano airports
```

Make your changes, then save and exit by pressing `Ctrl+X`, then `Y`, then `Enter`.

### Airports

Edit the `airports` file to include the ICAO codes of the airports you want to monitor. Each airport on a new line. Use "NULL" for gaps in your LED strip.

Example:
```
KDTW
NULL
KJFK
KLAX
```

### Display Airports (Optional)

If using the external display, edit `displayairports` to specify which airports to show details for. If not present, all airports will rotate.

### Settings

Edit `config.json` to customize the behavior of METARMap. Below is a detailed explanation of each configuration option:

#### LED Hardware Configuration
- **`LED_COUNT`**: Number of LEDs in your WS2811 strip. Must match the physical number of LEDs. Example: `50`
- **`LED_PIN`**: GPIO pin connected to the LED strip data line. For Raspberry Pi, use `"board.D18"` (GPIO 18). Example: `"board.D18"`
- **`LED_BRIGHTNESS`**: Default brightness level for the LEDs. Range: 0.0 (off) to 1.0 (full brightness). Example: `0.5`
- **`LED_ORDER`**: Color order of your LED strip. Usually `"neopixel.GRB"` for most WS2811 strips. Example: `"neopixel.GRB"`

#### Color Definitions
RGB color values (0-255) for different flight categories:
- **`COLOR_VFR`**: Color for Visual Flight Rules (good weather). Default: `[255, 0, 0]` (Red)
- **`COLOR_VFR_FADE`**: Faded color for VFR animations. Default: `[125, 0, 0]` (Dark Red)
- **`COLOR_MVFR`**: Color for Marginal VFR (moderate weather). Default: `[0, 0, 255]` (Blue)
- **`COLOR_MVFR_FADE`**: Faded color for MVFR animations. Default: `[0, 0, 125]` (Dark Blue)
- **`COLOR_IFR`**: Color for Instrument Flight Rules (poor weather). Default: `[0, 255, 0]` (Green)
- **`COLOR_IFR_FADE`**: Faded color for IFR animations. Default: `[0, 125, 0]` (Dark Green)
- **`COLOR_LIFR`**: Color for Low IFR (very poor weather). Default: `[0, 125, 125]` (Cyan)
- **`COLOR_LIFR_FADE`**: Faded color for LIFR animations. Default: `[0, 75, 75]` (Dark Cyan)
- **`COLOR_CLEAR`**: Color for no data or off. Default: `[0, 0, 0]` (Black)
- **`COLOR_LIGHTNING`**: Color for lightning conditions. Default: `[255, 255, 255]` (White)
- **`COLOR_HIGH_WINDS`**: Color for high wind conditions. Default: `[255, 255, 0]` (Yellow)

#### Animation Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_WINDCONDITION_ANIMATION`**: Enable blinking/fading for windy conditions. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`ACTIVATE_LIGHTNING_ANIMATION`**: Enable flashing for lightning in vicinity. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`FADE_INSTEAD_OF_BLINK`**: Use fade effect instead of on/off blink. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`WIND_BLINK_THRESHOLD`**: Wind speed (knots) to trigger wind animation. Example: `15`
- **`HIGH_WINDS_THRESHOLD`**: Wind speed for high winds (yellow color). Set to `-1` to disable. Example: `25`
- **`ALWAYS_BLINK_FOR_GUSTS`**: Always animate for gusts regardless of speed. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `false`
- **`BLINK_SPEED`**: Speed of animation cycles in seconds. Example: `2.0`
- **`BLINK_TOTALTIME_SECONDS`**: Total time the script runs in seconds. Example: `300` (5 minutes)

#### Daytime Dimming Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_DAYTIME_DIMMING`**: Enable brightness dimming during the day. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`BRIGHT_TIME_START`**: Time to start full brightness (HH:MM). Example: `"07:00"`
- **`DIM_TIME_START`**: Time to start dimming (HH:MM). Example: `"19:00"`
- **`LED_BRIGHTNESS_DIM`**: Dimmed brightness level (0.0 to 1.0). Example: `0.1`
- **`USE_SUNRISE_SUNSET`**: Use actual sunrise/sunset times instead of fixed times. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`LOCATION`**: City name for sunrise/sunset calculations (if enabled). Example: `"Detroit"`

#### External Display Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_EXTERNAL_METAR_DISPLAY`**: Enable the OLED display for METAR details. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`DISPLAY_ROTATION_SPEED`**: Seconds between display updates. Example: `5.0`

#### Legend Display Settings
- **`SHOW_LEGEND`**: Show a color legend on extra LEDs. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `false`
- **`OFFSET_LEGEND_BY`**: Position offset for the legend. Example: `0`

#### Data Processing Settings
- **`REPLACE_CAT_WITH_CLOSEST`**: Fill missing flight categories with the nearest station's data. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`

## Testing

To test the setup:
```
sudo python3 metar.py
```

The LEDs should light up according to current weather conditions.

## Running Automatically

The setup script configures crontab to run the map every 5 minutes between 7 AM and 10 PM, and turn off lights at 10:05 PM.

To view or modify the schedule:
```
crontab -e
```

## Flight Categories

- **VFR (Visual Flight Rules)**: Green - Good weather
- **MVFR (Marginal VFR)**: Blue - Moderate weather
- **IFR (Instrument Flight Rules)**: Red - Poor weather
- **LIFR (Low IFR)**: Magenta - Very poor weather

## Animations

- **Wind**: LEDs fade/blink for windy conditions
- **Lightning**: White flashes for thunderstorms
- **High Winds**: Yellow for very high winds

## Troubleshooting

- Ensure the Raspberry Pi has internet access
- Check LED connections and power supply
- Verify airport codes are correct ICAO codes
- For display issues, ensure I2C is enabled and wiring is correct

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Working test run for auto support, need full end user testing now

README.md, after:

# METARMap

A Raspberry Pi project to visualize flight conditions on a map using WS2811 LEDs. The LEDs change colors based on METAR weather data from aviationweather.gov.

## Features

- Real-time weather visualization with color-coded LEDs
- Support for wind and lightning animations
- Optional daytime dimming based on sunrise/sunset
- Optional external mini OLED display for METAR details
- Automated scheduling via crontab

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi (any model with GPIO)
- WS2811 LED strip (or compatible)
- Optional: Mini OLED display (SSD1306) for METAR details
- Internet connection for fetching weather data
- Basic knowledge of connecting LEDs to Raspberry Pi GPIO

## Hardware Setup

1. Connect the WS2811 LED strip to your Raspberry Pi:
   - Data pin to GPIO 18 (physical pin 12)
   - Power and ground as appropriate
   - For more details, see the [Adafruit NeoPixel guide](https://learn.adafruit.com/neopixels-on-raspberry-pi)

2. If using the optional display:
   - Connect the SSD1306 OLED display via I2C
   - Enable I2C in raspi-config

## Installation

1. Download or clone this repository to your Raspberry Pi:
   ```
   git clone --branch docker_support https://github.com/ejmmje/METARMap.git
   cd METARMap
   ```

2. Run the setup script:
   ```
   sudo bash setup.sh
   ```
   This will install dependencies, set permissions, and configure crontab.

3. If using an external display, you may need to reboot after I2C was enabled for the display.
    ```
    sudo reboot
    ```
   
4. This is it! The map should now run based on the example airports listed in the airports file. To edit them, see the Configuration section below.

## Configuration

- To change configuration, edit the config json manually or run the setup script again:
  ```
  nano config.json
  ```

### - Changing airports display!!

You need to do this *manually* by editing the `airports` file. If you have an external display and wish to only display a subset, you need to edit the `displayairports` file.
For example, to edit the airports file:

```
nano airports
```

Make your changes, then save and exit by pressing `Ctrl+X`, then `Y`, then `Enter`.

### Airports

Edit the `airports` file to include the ICAO codes of the airports you want to monitor. Each airport on a new line. Use "NULL" for gaps in your LED strip.

Example:
```
KDTW
NULL
KJFK
KLAX
```

### Display Airports (Optional)

If using the external display, edit `displayairports` to specify which airports to show details for. If not present, all airports will rotate.

## Settings List for Reference or Custom Configuration

Edit `config.json` to customize the behavior of METARMap. Below is a detailed explanation of each configuration option:

#### LED Hardware Configuration
- **`LED_COUNT`**: Number of LEDs in your WS2811 strip. Must match the physical number of LEDs. Example: `50`
- **`LED_PIN`**: GPIO pin connected to the LED strip data line. For Raspberry Pi, use `"board.D18"` (GPIO 18). Example: `"board.D18"`
- **`LED_BRIGHTNESS`**: Default brightness level for the LEDs. Range: 0.0 (off) to 1.0 (full brightness). Example: `0.5`
- **`LED_ORDER`**: Color order of your LED strip. Usually `"neopixel.GRB"` for most WS2811 strips. Example: `"neopixel.GRB"`

#### Color Definitions
RGB color values (0-255) for different flight categories:
- **`COLOR_VFR`**: Color for Visual Flight Rules (good weather). Default: `[255, 0, 0]` (Green)
- **`COLOR_VFR_FADE`**: Faded color for VFR animations. Default: `[125, 0, 0]` (Green Fade)
- **`COLOR_MVFR`**: Color for Marginal VFR (moderate weather). Default: `[0, 0, 255]` (Blue)
- **`COLOR_MVFR_FADE`**: Faded color for MVFR animations. Default: `[0, 0, 125]` (Blue Fade)
- **`COLOR_IFR`**: Color for Instrument Flight Rules (poor weather). Default: `[0, 255, 0]` (Red)
- **`COLOR_IFR_FADE`**: Faded color for IFR animations. Default: `[0, 125, 0]` (Red Fade)
- **`COLOR_LIFR`**: Color for Low IFR (very poor weather). Default: `[0, 125, 125]` (Magenta)
- **`COLOR_LIFR_FADE`**: Faded color for LIFR animations. Default: `[0, 75, 75]` (Magenta Fade)
- **`COLOR_CLEAR`**: Color for no data or off. Default: `[0, 0, 0]` (Clear)
- **`COLOR_LIGHTNING`**: Color for lightning conditions. Default: `[255, 255, 255]` (White)
- **`COLOR_HIGH_WINDS`**: Color for high wind conditions. Default: `[255, 255, 0]` (Yellow)

#### Animation Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_WINDCONDITION_ANIMATION`**: Enable blinking/fading for windy conditions. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`ACTIVATE_LIGHTNING_ANIMATION`**: Enable flashing for lightning in vicinity. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`FADE_INSTEAD_OF_BLINK`**: Use fade effect instead of on/off blink. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`WIND_BLINK_THRESHOLD`**: Wind speed (knots) to trigger wind animation. Example: `15`
- **`HIGH_WINDS_THRESHOLD`**: Wind speed for high winds (yellow color). Set to `-1` to disable. Example: `25`
- **`ALWAYS_BLINK_FOR_GUSTS`**: Always animate for gusts regardless of speed. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `false`
- **`BLINK_SPEED`**: Speed of animation cycles in seconds. Example: `2.0`
- **`BLINK_TOTALTIME_SECONDS`**: Total time the script runs in seconds. Example: `300` (5 minutes)

#### Daytime Dimming Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_DAYTIME_DIMMING`**: Enable brightness dimming during the day. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`BRIGHT_TIME_START`**: Time to start full brightness (HH:MM). Example: `"07:00"`
- **`DIM_TIME_START`**: Time to start dimming (HH:MM). Example: `"19:00"`
- **`LED_BRIGHTNESS_DIM`**: Dimmed brightness level (0.0 to 1.0). Example: `0.1`
- **`USE_SUNRISE_SUNSET`**: Use actual sunrise/sunset times instead of fixed times. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`LOCATION`**: City name for sunrise/sunset calculations (if enabled). Example: `"Detroit"`

#### External Display Settings
- **`ACTIVATE_EXTERNAL_METAR_DISPLAY`**: Enable the OLED display for METAR details. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`
- **`DISPLAY_ROTATION_SPEED`**: Seconds between display updates. Example: `5.0`

#### Legend Display Settings
- **`SHOW_LEGEND`**: Show a color legend on extra LEDs. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `false`
- **`OFFSET_LEGEND_BY`**: Position offset for the legend. Example: `0`

#### Data Processing Settings
- **`REPLACE_CAT_WITH_CLOSEST`**: Fill missing flight categories with the nearest station's data. Set to `true` or `false`. Default: `true`

## Testing

To test the setup:
```
sudo metarmap_env/bin/python3 metar.py
```

The LEDs should light up according to current weather conditions.

## Running Automatically

The setup script configures crontab to run the map every 5 minutes between 7:00 AM and 9:59 PM, and turn off lights at 10:05 PM.

To view or modify the schedule:
```
sudo crontab -e
```

## Flight Categories

- **VFR (Visual Flight Rules)**: Green - Good weather
- **MVFR (Marginal VFR)**: Blue - Moderate weather
- **IFR (Instrument Flight Rules)**: Red - Poor weather
- **LIFR (Low IFR)**: Magenta - Very poor weather

## Animations

- **Wind**: LEDs fade/blink for windy conditions
- **Lightning**: White flashes for thunderstorms
- **High Winds**: Yellow for very high winds

## Troubleshooting

- Ensure the Raspberry Pi has internet access
- Check LED connections and power supply
- Verify airport codes are correct ICAO codes
- For display issues, ensure I2C is enabled and wiring is correct
